---
title: Separate commands to sign and send votes in politeiavoter
created_utc: 2021-11-19
---

I would like to create/sign votes, and send votes, in two different commands.

First, here's an overview of the flexibility gained from the design proposed below:

- sign and send on different devices with different security restrictions (e.g. sign in a bunker and send from a disposable device)
- prepare votes for all proposals (with different choices) and then send them in one go
- correct any wrong votes before sending (ever casted a wrong choice?)
- cast a custom number of votes (not all eligible votes)
- choose when and how to send votes: all at once, trickle all votes, or send manually in small batches
- using transports other than Tor becomes easier
- retry failed votes at any later time, after process exit, without re-unlocking the wallet
- hack custom code to manage the votes or sending (because state is exposed as simple files)
- might help testing too

It could work like this.

**Phase 1**. Collect wallet private passphrase, perform sensitive operations with the wallet, sign all votes, lock the wallet, save all votes to disk and exit.

    $ politeiavoter signvotes 91cfcc8 yes
    Signing 7 YES votes for token "91cfcc8", title "Politeia: Pi 2021 Q3 (Proposal System)"
    Enter wallet private passphrase: ...
    Signed and saved 7 YES votes for token "91cfcc8", title "Politeia: Pi 2021 Q3 (Proposal System)"

`signvotes` can be done multiple times for different proposals. Put "sign" into the command name to make caller aware of operations on an unlocked wallet.

The command should error if there are no eligible votes _to be cast_, e.g. if all eligible votes have been already signed and saved.

This is a good moment to consider an extra `account` argument to only source that account for eligible tickets and not all accounts.

After this a file for each individual vote is available in `{appdata}/pending` directory, to be sent by `politeiavoter` or any custom program the user has. It is kind of an "outbox" or an outgoing queue. I suggest to use simple JSON files for easy hacking:

    {
        "token": "91cfcc8",
        "choice": "yes",
        "ticket": "ticket hash",
        "vote": "base64-encoded blob with the vote that can be directly sent"
    }

At this point the user may delete any votes from the `pending` dir and sign again to correct mistakes.

**Phase 2**. Send the specified number of votes, respecting any configured trickling options.

    $ politeiavoter sendvotes 6
    2021-01-01 01:01:01.001 Sent 2 votes to proposals.decred.org
    2021-01-01 01:09:01.001 Sent 2 votes to proposals.decred.org
    2021-01-01 01:17:01.001 Sent 2 votes to proposals.decred.org

Second arg is optional, when not specified `sendvotes` sends all pending votes. Existing args to control trickling apply here as well: `--trickle`, `--voteduration`, `--hoursprior`.

Votes are _only_ sourced from the `pending` dir. `sendvotes` does not need a running dcrwallet. After each vote is sent and receipt is confirmed by the server, it is removed from `pending` dir. Failed votes stay in the `pending` dir to be retried later. Sending can be done in batches.

`politeiavoter inventory` should only report the vote as eligible if it was not confirmed by the server. Ideally, modify the output to also print pending votes:

    $ politeiavoter inventory
    ...
    Eligible votes: 7
    Pending votes: 4

Keep the `vote` command as is to not break existing scripts, and since it is a convenient command that does everything in one go.
