---
title: Wrapped lines vs long lines in Markdown
created_utc: 2019-12-10
updated_utc: 2023-09-03
---

In this doc I'm compiling pros and cons of wrapped lines in Markdown. See [Terminology](#terminology) at the end if you're unfamiliar.

This analysis focuses on **text documents** like Markdown. For **code files** there is no debate - code lines *must* be wrapped manually at max length chosen by each project.

So far my takeaways are:

- Optimize for people who do the **most work** with the documents, like repo maintainers.
- If they prefer command-line and developer tools, use wrapped lines.
- If they prefer GUIs and web editing, use long lines.
- In any case keep it locally consistent.
- Personally I prefer soft-wrapping text documents in my projects. Soft-wrapping software is more widespread and has lowers barrier for contributors.


## Wrapped lines pros

- **Better UX in simple editors** that can't wrap long lines visually
  - Specifically, there is no painful horizontal scrolling.
  - This is only a pro for windows wide enough to fit 80 characters (see below).
  - { _examples, which editors can't soft-wrap?_ }
  - { _who is using them?_ }
- **Better UX in simple diffing software** that cannot wrap long lines visually
  - Diffs are easier to read without painful horizontal scrolling.
  - Examples: gitk
  - { _more examples, is it mostly CLI differs?_ }
- **Better UX in unified diffs of very long lines**, even if the differ can wrap visually
  - e.g. GitHub's Unified Diff can wrap long lines and highlight changed words inside changed lines, but still, when the paragraphs are very long the changes are hard to see because they are too far away vertically. It is easier to locate and compare changes when they are next to each other in a unified diff, or if they are on the same vertical level in split diffs.
- **Better code review UX**
  - Shorter lines are significantly easier to update/review/provide feedback upon [1]
- **Git is more efficient with short lines**
  - "git itself calculates diffs on a line-by-line basis, so splitting lines actually makes the repo smaller/faster to work with" [1] { _add studies/stats to prove this point_ }
- **git add --patch**
  - `git add --patch` allows to selectively add some changes to a Git commit while not adding the others. For people using Git from the command line it is a great tool for authoring commits, and it works better with short lines.
- **git blame works better**
  - { _explain, examples_ }


## Long lines pros

- **Visual wrapping is widely supported in software**
  - Browsers: long lines are wrapped in many HTML elements like `<p>` or `<textarea>`. Even plain text is "responsive" out of the box and looks good even on very narrow screens. In other words, **text is reflowable by default**.
  - GitHub's web editor and all differs (Unified, Split, Source, Rich) can wrap as of Sep 2023.
  - Desktop GUI editors and differs are generally good at visual wrapping: { _examples_ }
  - In contrast, wrapped text requires additional processing to un-wrap and make it responsive. Some software can do it (regular GitHub Markdown renderer) while some cannot (browsers' rendering of plaintext, many desktop editors and differs, GitHub Releases renderer).

- **No need of text re-wrapping support in software**
  - The "re-wrap text" feature is not common in text editor and diffing software. At best you need to install a plugin, at worst it is not possible.
  - If your editor cannot re-wrap text it is pain to do it manually.
  - Editors that don't support re-wrapping: GitHub web editor, { _more examples_ }.

- **Easier to contribute for more people**
  - As a consequence of not needing an advanced re-wrapping editor setup, more people can contribute to your Markdown documents even with "lame" housewife editors like the GitHub web editor. Hate it or not, lowering the barrier and getting more contributions is nice.

- **Better UX in narrow windows under 80 characters**
  - Horizontal scrolling of lines longer than 80 characters is annoying. But wrapped lines on screens *smaller* than 80 characters wide is also annoying.
  - The use case for narrow (under 80) editor windows is when you need two side by side editors but the screen is not wide enough to fit two 80-char editors, like when you need bigger fonts for your eyes.
  - Even if the screen is wide enough, sometimes it is preferrable to have a smaller editor window(s) to have more space for the main work window.

- **No cascade re-wrapping**
  - Changing one wrapped line may trigger re-wrapping of all subsequent lines in that paragraph, producing a noisier diff. This is a small issue because (a) most differs can hide insignificant "whitespace changes" and (b) you should not write too long paragraphs anyway. But still it is nice to not have this in long-lines text.

- **Easy to grep full paragraphs**
  - When processing text line by line (like grep), full paragraphs are captured. When lines are wrapped it is almost impossible to grep full paragraps, your best bet is adding context lines (`grep -C` etc.).


## Terminology

- **Wrapped lines** - aka "split lines" or "short lines". A line is "wrapped" when an explicit *line break* character is inserted to limit the length of each line (most commonly at 80 characters). In text documents one paragraph may contain multiple wrapped lines.

- **Long lines** - "unwrapped lines", "joined lines", "full lines". In text documents each paragraph contains one, possibly very long line.

- **Visual wrapping** - when long lines are *shown* wrapped but real line break characters are not inserted. This is called just "Line wrapping" in most software. GitHub calls it "Soft wrap". Visual wrapping is a must to kill vertical scrollbars in long-lines text.

- **Hard wrapping** - the opposite of *visual* or *soft wrapping*, i.e. when real line breaks are inserted to wrap the lines.

- **Re-wrapping** - a process of splitting and joining the lines to achieve the target max length and make the text pretty again. This is needed after some lines were edited and became longer or much shorter than the max length. Re-wrapping is automated in some software. If not, it must be done manually.

- **Line break** - aka "newline" character, "line ending" or "end of line", commonly the `LF` character (obviously `CR` should die in fire).


## References

- [1] https://github.com/decred/dcrdocs/pull/1029#issuecomment-563984494
- [2] https://github.com/decred/dcrweb/pull/1136#issuecomment-1703673009
