---
published_url: https://www.reddit.com/r/decred/comments/b9vhee/voting_has_started_for_the_bring_decred_to_africa/eks6578/
---

Politeia doesn't allow post-vote discussion so posting here.

**What I like**

* George Pro is leading Ghana community building. I don't know a lot about it but the start looks not bad.
* All goals outlined in the proposal are worth pursuing.
* Appreciate the planning effort put into the proposal.

**Concerns**

guang [said it](https://proposals.decred.org/proposals/dac06f18bfeb5f7667e56554774de3bb99151018ce16a64f5353bab45819763b/comments/38) best.

The proposal is high risk because it is too vague, too ambitious and wants to do too many things at once. I would like to see smaller and more concrete steps voted or delivered first before growing to a budget like this.

I have doubts about merchant interest.

What I would like to avoid is Decred stakeholders blindly buying hopium about adoption in some country while not really knowing the crypto situation there. For example, from some media I got an impression that in Venezuela there are long queues to buy crypto, while a person who was there said it's not the case.

Decred's user-facing software is not ready for mass adoption. It needs simpler UI modes and more built-in guidance so that users can start with most basic use (send and receive) and gradually learn to do more and have more control. I believe at this stage we should target more technical people that are more likely to fix tech problems on their own and who can train more people.

I don't support some marketing tactics:

* Giveaways, "training tips" and "referrals" is too cheap. It is wrong kind of relationships to build. If we advertise by giving away money, we will get people who want free money. When we stop giving away money these people will run away to next source of free stuff. But if we talk about fundamentals we will get people who care about fundamentals. This group is way smaller but is also much more valuable.
* Merch like shirts and stickers is cool when people actively come to you and _ask_ for it, not when you push it. If a bunch of people wear Decred symbols it doesn't mean they're deep into the project and won't wear different symbols tomorrow.
* Photo contest is painting artificial engagement. Again, these people will come for rewards and be gone tomorrow. Bad spend of resources to me.

I didn't understand the "West vs Africa" argument, it was very vague. Giveaways and free money is cheap and unsustainable tactic regardless of the continent.

**Questions**

Is there any data about how merchants and businesses are using crypto in Ghana today? Or at least some sentiment surveys?

Dash questions:

* Are you active in Bitcoin or Dash now?
* What did you like in Dash over Bitcoin?
* Whad did you like in Decred over Dash?
* How did similar efforts go/end for Dash?
* Did any merchants start accepting Dash?
* Did people start using Dash?
* Any experience to learn from?

Note: I'm not against Dash, just looking to learn from past experience. They are clearly ahead in communicating with end users in many regions.

**On some comments**

* "But you worked for Dash or Y or Z" - wrong thing to focus, all that should matter is one's credibility in the Decred community and the lack of conflicts of interest.
* "Don't market Decred as MoE, we only need SoV now" - disagree, we need the right balance between SoV and MoE for each stage of Decred expansion. Right now it's like 70% SoV 30% MoE. 100% SoV detached from MoE makes no sense to me. It is a fantasy, although one that can be temporarily shared among a group of people ("hey let's all agree we are rich now!"). The whole purpose of money is to enable exchange, even if it is currently not super convenient. I already use Decred as permissionless energy transfer to support a project I like, and it feels great compared to just sitting on my bag.
* "It makes no sense for people to spend now" - partially disagree. I try to limit it but I do spend my Decred sometimes. Some things can't wait the Moon for years. We need to live today. And there are use cases besides just spending, remittance being an important one.
* "We should target large investors" - not sure about that. All investors want is ROI asap. I'd say we need smart investors above large investors. We need people who value the high degree of sovereignty Decred strives for, and are ready to bear with us while we get all the bits right and streamline the user experience.
* Giving away testnet coins is a [great idea](https://proposals.decred.org/proposals/dac06f18bfeb5f7667e56554774de3bb99151018ce16a64f5353bab45819763b/comments/43). Train people to test hot new stuff before trusting it their money.
* Hostility is unnecessary and is unproductive. Just exposing and refuting bad ideas is enough.
* We'll need some moderation system to keep discussion focused on the decision and not devolve into name calling.

**Recommendation**

* For conferences, seminars and workshops try drawing from the 2019 Events budget.
* For merchants adoption, test assumptions first and collect more data. Why wouldn't they just accept Bitcoin or Dash? Try to convince one or two merchants to test Decred and see how they react. Write down any pain points and what info they need, share with devs and writers what needs to be done, the come back to merchants and repeat.
* Survey Point of Sale systems that support crypto and are available in Ghana.
* Present more real data about merchant adoption in next proposals.
* Expenses to experiment with merchants shouldn't be large and could come from 2019 Marketing budget.
* For user training, start with leading a small group of users, collect their feedback and pain points, help to improve UX of the wallet software, after a month or two write how they feel about using Decred.
* For huge goals like "massive adoption" or "integrate in all platforms", start from delivering small steps one by one and build up trust and support.
* "Physical exchange": too big, I suggest to separate it into its own proposal.
* "simple and easy platform for hundreds of businesses": too ambitious and vague, needs decomposition into smaller proposals.
* Do not link to google docs as primary source of a document, instead save spreadsheet in CSV and attach it to the proposal.

Style advise:

* It was very hard to read text and comments. Improve formatting with basic Markdown and use paragraphs. Well formatted and structured text is easier and faster to read hence it gets more attention.
* Don't use code blocks for regular text - it makes annoying horizontal scrolling.

I hope this can be useful for Ghana and similar proposals to boost local adoption.
