---
title: Organizing a documents repository
created_utc: 2020-11-10
updated_utc: 2022-05-15
---

Why all of this matters:

- If we care about long-term _preservation of knowledge_ stored in your documents, we need more people to be able to copy, maintain and use them.
- More people who can manipulate your documents productively means more copies and more replication, which leads to more resilience.
- Following recommendations below makes it easier for others to work with your documents.


## Stick to ASCII characters in file names

Limiting your file names to ASCII avoids many technical issues.

ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchange) is the most widely compatible-with-everything encoding of Latin characters used in computers:

- uppercase from `A` to `Z`
- lowercase from `a` to `z`
- digits from `0` to `1`
- some punctiation like `.` `,` `!` and so on

See the full list [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASCII#Printable_characters).

ASCII filenames are the best:

- they can be typed on all keyboards
- easy to work with in command line where you type the names
- they can be displayed without issues in practically all devices
- no encoding mess in URLs


## Use lowercase characters in file names

Lowercase characters require less key presses when typing, which is more productive.


## Avoid spaces in file names

Avoiding space character (` `) in file names makes them easier to work with.

With most modern GUI tools you may not care about spaces in file names, but this becomes an issue when working with files in [command-line interfaces](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command-line_interface) (CLI).

It is common to use underscore (`_`), hyphen (`-`) and period (`.`) instead of spaces in file names.


## Do not abuse the root directory

Planning directory structure in advance helps to avoid moving files and breaking links that people have bookmarked or posted on the Internet.

"Root directory" is the base, top-most directory in your repository. It should not contain too many files. A common mistake is to start putting everything in the root directory and then find yourself in a mess.

When deciding "should this go in a root directory?", an easy quick test is to ask "do I expect many files of this 'kind' in the future?". If the answer is yes, make a directory for them.

For example, imagine you create a repository for hosting articles. You start by putting a `README.md` file in the root dir that describes what the repo is about. It is common for `README.md` to live in the root dir.

Then you want to add `my-article.md`. "Do I expect to see more articles in the future" -> "Yes!". So put it in a directory. Then repo then looks like

```
+ articles/
    my-article.md

  README.md
```


## Put date in the file name where it makes sense

Putting date at the beginning of the file name sorts them nicely.

There are types of documents that benefit from being sorted by date, like posts and their translations.

An easy test to deterime if the document is of "post" type is to ask "Do I expect this document to change after original publication?" and "Is it a 'living' document that needs to be up-to-date?". If the answer to both is No, it is likely a "post"-type doc.

For example, consider a repository hosting both "post" and "living" documents:

```
+ articles/
    20200208-four-years-retrospective.md
    20200811-decred-to-the-moon.md

+ instructions/
    building-from-source.md
    organizing-docs-repo.md

README.md
```

For a date format it is common to use either `YYYYMMDD` (e.g. `20200208`) or `YYYY-MM-DD` (e.g. `2020-02-08`)


## Avoid breaking links

When renaming/moving files whose links have been widely shared, make it easier to find the new location of the file.

Imagine you published a document on GitHub and shared this link:

    https://github.com/user/repo/blob/master/my-epic-doc.md

and then this link was picked up by other people and used in their posts.

And then your repo got bigger and you want to move files around.

Simply moving the file will break the link. People following the link will see a [Not Found](https://github.com/decredcommunity/guidelines/blob/master/badlink.md) page and likely get stuck.

To avoid this,

1. Move the file to a new location (in one commit)
2. Create a new file at the old location, pointing to the new location (in a follow-up commit)

Doing this in separate commits will help Git to better track histories when you need to inspect history of a certain file.

In the example above, let's say you moved the from a root directory to `docs/my-epic-doc.md`. After that create `my-epic-doc.md` with the following contents:

```
MOVED: [docs/my-epic-doc.md](docs/my-epic-doc.md)
```

This will make the link clickable in HTML views and still possible to follow manually in plaintext views.


## Write Git commit messages in English

English commit messages increase the set of people who can work with your repository.

If you write Git commit messages in e.g. Spanish, it may not be an issue while your project is small and all 2-3 members of the project speak Spanish. But if you want speakers of other languages to be able to work with your repository, it is a good idea to use English in Git messages to help other people navigate the history or otherwise work with the repo.
